K8s mainnet Hornet node tutorial (#111)
iotaledger/chrysalis-docs: docs/tutorials/mainnet_hornet_node_k8s.md

```ascii
server: https://192.168.64.2:16443
```

Additionally you can get access to your Hornet Node REST API endpoint through the external load balancer defined by the Ingress Controller. In the case of a local configuration this does not make so much a difference as the machine where the Ingress Controller lives is just the same as the Service machine (more details at [https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx)). However in the case of a real environment provided by a public cloud provider, your Ingress controller will usually be mapped to a load balancer exposed through a public IP address. You can find more information below when we talk about specifics of commercial public cloud environments.

*Remember that it might take a while for your Hornet Pods to be running and ready*

### Working with multiple instances

If you want to work with multiple instances you can scale your current K8s StatefulSet by running:

```sh
INSTANCES=2 hornet-k8s.sh scale
```

> If the cluster has enough resources, automatically a new Hornet Node will be spawned and peered with your original one.

Author: essentially your Node will not be run but it is a good idea to show how it can de diagnosed

* `/app/config.json` against the `configuration` volume. 
* `app/p2p2store` against the `p2pstore` subfolder of the `hornet-ledger` Persistent Volume.
* `app/p2pstore/identity.key` against the transient, internal `secrets-volume` of the Pod.
* `app/peering.json` against the `peering` subfolder of the `hornet-ledger` Persistent Volume. Please note that this is necessary as the peering configuration is dynamic and new peers might be added during the lifecycle of the Hornet Node.
* `app/mainnetdb` against the `mainnetdb` subfolder of the  `hornet-ledger` Persistent Volume (to store the database files).
* `app/snapshots/mainnet` against the `snapshots` subfolder of the `hornet-ledger` Persistent Volume (to store snapshots).

Apart from that, the Pod template configuration declares extra configuration details such as `liveness` and `readiness` probes, security contexts, and links to other resources such as the Secret that defines the dashboard credentials (actually mapped into environment variables).  

### Services

There are two different kind of Services used in our blueprint:

> * A Node Port Service `hornet-rest` (declared by the `hornet-rest-service.yaml` manifest) that is just bound to the StatefulSet and to the port `14265` of the Hornet Nodes. Its purpose is to enable exposing the REST API endpoint of the Hornet nodes. The endpoint Pods of such a Service are those labeled as `app=hornet`.

Reviewer: We could probably remove "just" from this as well.

* One Node Port Service (`hornet-0`, `hornet-1`, ..., `hornet-n`) per Hornet Node, declared by the `hornet-service.yaml` manifest. These Node Port Services are intended to expose access to the individual dashboard, gossip and autopeering endpoints of each node. Thus, it is *only bound to one and only one Hornet Node*. For this purpose its configuration includes `externalTrafficPolicy` `local` and a selector named `statefulset.kubernetes.io/pod-name: hornet-set-x` where `x` corresponds to the Pod number of the Hornet Node the Service is bound to. Under the hood the one-click script takes care of creating as many Services of this type as needed.

### Ingress Controller `hornet-ingress`

> The Ingress Controller `hornet-ingress` is configured so that the `hornet-rest` Service can be externally load balanced. There are two path mappings, `/api` which backend is the  `hornet-rest` Service and `/` which backend is the dashboard of the `hornet-0` Service. The latter is just for convenience reasons of this blueprint. In the default configuration the `kubernetes.io/ingress.class` is `nginx` but that can be overridden for specific cloud environments (see below).

Reviewer: Same as before, probably take out "just"

```sh
kubectl get configmap/hornet-config -n tangle -o=yaml
```

The same for credentials of the Hornet dashboard (all the nodes share the same admin credentials)

```sh
kubectl get secrets/hornet-secret -n tangle -o=yaml
```

and for the Nodes' private keys:

```sh
kubectl get secrets/hornet-private-key -n tangle -o=yaml
```

## Google Kubernetes environment (GKE) specifics

Our deployment recipes are fully portable to the [GKE](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine) public cloud environment. The only custom step is to ensure that the Ingress Controller is properly annotated with `kubernetes.io/ingress.class: gce`. You can do that by just executing

```sh
kubectl annotate -f hornet-ingress.yaml -n $NAMESPACE --overwrite kubernetes.io/ingress.class=gce
```

Alternatively if you are using the "one click" script you can just execute

```sh
INGRESS_CLASS=gce hornet-k8s.sh deploy
```

and the one click script will perform the annotation during the deployment process.

*Remember that the process of deploying an external load balancer by a public cloud provider can take a while.*

> On the other hand to get access to the Service Node Ports you would need to have a cluster with public K8s workers. You can know the public IP addresses of your K8s workers by running:

Reviewer: Swap "can" with "determine", maybe.

```sh
kubectl get nodes -o=wide
```

> Then, you can know on which K8s worker your Hornet Pod is running by executing (`NAMESPACE` by default would be `tangle`):

Reviewer: "Then, you can determine which K8s worker on your Hornet Pod..."

```sh
kubectl get pods -n $NAMESPACE -o=wide
```

Once you know the worker and its IP address you can get access to each individual Hornet Node by knowing the Node ports declared by the corresponding service. And remember you can do it by running:

```sh
kubectl get services -n $NAMESPACE
```

Once you know the port you have to create firewall rules so that such port is reachable. That can be done using the [gcloud](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install) tool. For instance, if our Hornet Node's dashboard is mapped to port `34200` and the public IP address of our K8s worker is `1.1.1.1`:

```sh
gcloud compute firewall-rules create test-hornet-dashboard --allow tcp:34200
```

> Afterwards we can open up a browser and load `http://1.1.1.1:34200` to get access to the Hornet Node's dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you can open up a browser and load `http://1.1.1.1:34200` to access the Hornet Node's dashboard.
```

> Other interesting aspects you may have to look into when moving to a production-ready system is the encryption of Secrets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may also have to look into encrypting Secrets when moving to a production-ready system.
```
We could add a link here.

## Amazon Kubernetes environment (EKS) specifics

Our deployment recipes are fully portable to the [EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/) commercial public cloud environment. However there are certain preparation steps (including IAM permission grants) that have to be executed on your cluster so that the Ingress Controller is properly mapped to an AWS Application Load Balancer (ALB). In addition, as it happens with the GKE environment (see above) you can get access to your Hornet Nodes through its Service Node Port. The procedure to be followed is similar to the one described above, and it as well requires a cluster with public workers and security groups configured so that traffic is enabled to the corresponding Service Node Ports.

> There are several preparation steps to be done on your cluster so that Ingress Controller objects are mapped to AWS Application Load Balancers. Please read these documents and follow the corresponding instructions on your cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will need to follow several preparation steps on your cluster to map the Ingress Controller objects to AWS Application Load Balancers. Please read these documents and follow the corresponding instructions on your cluster:
```

> * [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [AWS Docs - Create a kubeconfig for Amazon EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html) 
```

> * [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/alb-ingress.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/alb-ingress.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [AWS Docs - Application load balancing on Amazon EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/alb-ingress.html)
```

> * [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/aws-load-balancer-controller.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/aws-load-balancer-controller.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [AWS Docs - AWS Load Balancer Controller](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/aws-load-balancer-controller.html)
```

> * [https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.3/](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.3/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Kubernets Docs - AWS Load Balancer Controller](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.3/)
```

In addition you need to annotate your Ingress Controller with the following:

* `kubernetes.io/ingress.class=alb`
* `alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/scheme=internet-facing`

> * `alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/subnets` a comma-separated list of the IDs of the subnets that can actually host the Services being load balanced, for instance `subnet-aa1649cc, subnet-a656cffc, subnet-fdf3dcb5`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/subnets`: A comma-separated list of the IDs of the subnets that can actually host the Services being load balanced, for instance `subnet-aa1649cc, subnet-a656cffc, subnet-fdf3dcb5`.
```

Remember that you can annotate your Ingress Controller with `kubectl annotate`.

If all the cluster preparations and annotations have been made properly if you execute:

```sh
kubectl get ingress -n $NAMESPACE -o=wide
```

you will be able to find the DNS name of your external load balancer. (Please note it can take a while DNS servers to sync up).

```ascii
NAME             CLASS    HOSTS   ADDRESS                                                                 PORTS   AGE
hornet-ingress   <none>   *       xyz.eu-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com                                         80      71m
```

> ## Conclusions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

hornet-set-1   1/1     Running   0          24h
```

> However, if your cluster has not enough resources the new Pod will be listed but its status will be `Pending`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if your cluster does not have enough resources, the new POD will still be listed but its status will be `Pending`:
```
